# Hands-on Docker-01 : Docker Container Basic Operations

Purpose of the this hands-on training is to give students the knowledge of basic operation on Docker containers.

## Learning Outcomes

At the end of the this hands-on training, students will be able to;

- search for images in the docker hub,

- list the help about the Docker commands,

- list the running and stopped Docker containers,

- understand the properties of Docker containers,

- start, stop, and remove Docker containers,
  
- run in interactive mode.

## Discover the Docker Hub

- go to
https://hub.docker.com

- search for some images like

nginx, apache, wordpress

## Basic Container Commands of Docker

- Use your host machine terminal or AWS EC2 terminal

- Or with your Docker Hub credentials, you can use 
https://labs.play-with-docker.com


- If you use AWS EC2 then use the code below to install and start Docker
- Launch a t2.micro, Amazon Linux 2 EC2 instance with SSH and HTTP anywhere firewall configured

```bash
#!/bin/bash
yum update -y
yum -y install docker
service docker start
usermod -a -G docker ec2-user
chmod 666 /var/run/docker.sock
```


- Now let's check Docker version

```bash
docker version
```

- see the detailed information about Docker engine and containers

```bash
docker info
```

- Run either `docker` or `docker help` to see the help docs about docker commands.

```bash
docker help | less
```

- Run `docker COMMAND --help` to see more information about specific command.

```bash
docker run --help | less
```


- Run `hello-world` as a first image and container. To pull and run hello-world official image, use the following command.

```bash
docker run hello-world
```

- Show the list of all containers available on Docker machine and understand container properties.

- To see the `running containers`;  

```bash
docker ps
```

- To see the `running and exited/stopped containers`;  

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- Download and run `ubuntu` container.

```bash
docker run -it ubuntu
```

- Display the os name on the container for the current user.

```bash
uname -a
```

- Display the shell name on the container for the current user.

```bash
echo $0
```


- Run the second `ubuntu` os with interactive shell open and name container as `backend` and show that this `ubuntu` container is different from the previous one.

```bash
docker run -i -t --name backend ubuntu
```

- Exit the `ubuntu` container and return to user shell.

```bash
exit # to stop the process
```

- Show the list of all containers again and understand the second `ubuntu` containers' properties and how the names of containers are given.

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- Connect to the interactive shell of running `ubuntuiki` container and `exit` afterwards.

```bash
docker start backend
docker attach backend
exit
```

- Show that `backend` container has stopped by listing all containers.

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- Show that we can get more information about `backend` container by using `docker inspect` command and see the properties.

```bash
docker inspect backend | less
# Cikmak icin q veya crtl c'ya basin
```

- Delete the first container using its `ID`.

```bash
docker stop ContainerID && rm ContainerID
```

- Delete the second container using its name.

```bash
docker rm backend
```

- Or you can use `prune` command as well

```bash
docker container prune
```

- Show that both of containers are not listed anymore.

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- See if there are images 

docker images
docker image ls

- Get more detail on one of the images using inspect

docker image inspect imageID


## Let us try some popular Docker images

  docker pull rancher/cowsay
  docker run imageID merhaba!

- use a web server as a container

  docker pull nginx:alpine
  docker run -d -p hostport:containerport imageID
 
  check the browser to see http://localhost

- play supermario

  #run a container without pulling it first
  docker run -d -p 8600:8080 pengbai/docker-supermario

- run a container with a command output

  docker run alpine uname
  docker run alpine ls

## Let's pull a Mysql Database and run it as a container

  docker pull mysql:latest
  docker container run --detach --name mydb -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=java-dev mysql:latest

- enter the mysql container
  docker exec -it {containerID} sh

- enter the database client using the provided password then see the databases and tables
  mysql -p


- exit database container and see logs 

  docker logs containerID

## Docker as a Development Environment

docker run -it ubuntu

- use docker attach to attach a running container to shell
 
docker attach {containerID}

- use docker exec to attach a running container to shell

docker exec -it {containerID} /bin/bash

- when inside try

root@4c00bb0a:/# figlet hello bash

- see the error

bash: figlet command not found

- install it first, still inside the container

root@4c00bb0a:/# apt-get update -y

root@4c00bb0a:/# apt-get install figlet -y

- exit the container

- On host computer create a new folder hello-c

- Put the code inside a file named hello.c

```Hello.c
int main() {
    puts("Hello Docker World, this is B107!");
    return 0;
}
```

- Now, let's go back to the container to test inside the container if hello.c compiles

- start the ubuntu container

```bash
docker start {containerID}
```

- attach container to shell

```bash
docker attach {containerID}
```

- use Ctlr -P-Q read escape sequence to return to bash terminal without exiting the container

- in the terminal cd to the folder hello-c

```bash
cd .../hello-c
```

- copy hello.c file into the running container

```bash
docker cp hello.c {containerID}:/folder
```

- now attach to the container again

```bash
docker attach containerID
```

- inside the container install build-essential pack

```bash
apt-get install -y build-essential
```

- build the code

```bash
make hello
```

- run hello

```bash
./hello
```

- see that development and testing was successful


## Docker as a Development Environment: This time, write a simple Java program in a Docker Container

- First pull a Java Development Kit Image and run 

docker pull amazoncorretto:8-alpine-full
docker run -it amazoncorretto:8-alpine-full

- inside the container, let's create a java file

```bash
cat > hello.java
```
- copy and paste the code 
```bash
class hello{  
    public static void main(String args[]){  
        System.out.println("Hello Java!");  
    }  
}
```

- press Ctrl and D to exit

- check if the file is there
```bash
ls
```
- compile the file

```bash
javac hello.java
```

- see the compiled file

```bash
ls
```

- now run the file

```bash
java hello
```

- the output should be
Hello Java!

- we used a docker container, a container environment to develop a java app, all runtime, compiler etc. are inside like we did in AWS instance or like you do on your local computers.

- now, type exit to exit the container.

```bash
exit
```

- see if the container is still running

```bash
docker ps
```
- see that it stopped
- let's run it again

```bash
docker run -it amazoncorretto:8-alpine-full
```

-  check if the java files are there

```bash
/ # ls
```

- did you see that they are not there?

- when a container stops, the files user worked on do not persist

- however, solution to this exists, docker volumes can be created. docker volumes are folders on host computer.


## View logs of a container

- run a container that prints date and time each second

docker run -d jpetazzo/clock


- now see the logs of the container, still running

docker logs --tail 1 --follow 8bb


## Now that we finished, let's remove containers and images

- Stop running containers

  docker ps
  docker stop

- remove containers

  docker ps -a
  docker rm 

- remove images

  docker image ls
  docker rmi imageID